.\" @(#)w.1 1.1 86/07/10 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.TH MOSMESH 1 "15 September 1988"
.SH NAME
mosmesh \- Pisces deck generator for simple MOS devices - Version 8822
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmosmesh\fP [ \fB\-abist -f [defaultfile] -m[modifyfile] -o [outputfile] \fP ] [ outputfile ]
.IX  "w command"  ""  "\fLw\fP \(em what are users doing"
.IX  "what are users doing"  ""  "what are users doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.IX  users  "what are they doing"  users  "what are they doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.IX  login  "what are users doing"  login  "what are users doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fIMOSMESH\fP is an interactive program that generates a PISCES2-B input
deck MOS structures.
Questions are asked of the user such as doping concentrations, gate lengths,
spacer thicknesses, and range of biases applied to the terminals.
Upon completion, a pisces deck is generated in file outputfile.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fP
Use analytic functions for doping profiles [default].
.TP
\fB\-b\fP
Batch mode.  take default data and generate a deck.
.TP
\fB\-f [defaultfile]\fP
read default information from file defaultfile.  if no filename is given
then the default is .defaultmesh.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP
Generate drain characteristics.
.TP
\fB\-m [modifyfile]\fP
indicates that the default values to change (along with their new values)
are present in file modifyfile.
.TP
\fB\-o [filename]\fP
write output to filename.  if no filename is given then the default is
mosmesh.out.  also if a filename is given as the last argument to 
mosmesh, then the -o flag is ignored.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP
indicates that Suprem3 doping profiles will be used
.TP
\fB\-t\fP
Generate gate characteristics for a fixed drain bias.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.nf
1 zotz> mosmesh -i filea \- generates Pisces deck for 
			drain characteristics in filea

2 zotz> mosmesh -t fileb \- generates Pisces deck for 
			gate characteristics in fileb

3 zotz> mosmesh -f playmesh -o outfile \- generates Pisces deck 
			from information in playmesh and writes the
			deck to outfile. no solve cards are present.

4 zotz> mosmesh -st gate.in \- use Suprem3 doping files and generate
			   gate characteristics in gate.in

5 zotz> mosmesh -m changes -b -o outfile \- operates in batch mode, 
				       using the defaults in .defaultmesh.
				       In addition any changes to the
				       default values are specified in file
				       changes.  See user manual for
				       details.
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
\&.defaultmesh
holds responses from previous mosmesh run

\&.tempfile
holds data from current session

.SH BUGS
does not check input for unreasonable data

no backup mode to change a previous entry.  you must rerun the program.

convergence problems with very short channel devices.

please report any other bugs to chin@rats.stanford.edu
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Mark Law
Goodwin Chin
