.\" @(#)w.1 1.1 86/07/10 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.\ "%W%\t%G%";
.TH IG2IMAGE 1 "31 December 1990"
.SH NAME
ig2imagetool \- NCSA Image Interface for PISCES-IIB and SUPREM-IV files
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBig2image\fP [ \fB\-ab [bin_file] cel m # p [pisc_file] q v # \fP] meshfile 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fiig2image\fP is an interactive program that generates movies for
ImageTool.
Questions are asked of the user such as whether movies are being produced,
the number of pixels for each frame, the pixel expansion for each data point,
the name of the binary frames,
and relevent data to retrieve PISCES-IIB solution files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fP
Take absolute value of data.
.TP
\fB\-b bin_file\fP
Use bin_file for outputting binary data.  bin_file is appended with a
unique integer for frame number as well as a image size (only occurs on
the first frame for a movie).
.TP
\fB\-e\fP
Make a movie using multiple files with special increment code.
File format is filennn, where nnn is a 3 digit number.
.TP
\fB\-l\fP
Take logorithm base 10 of data.
.TP
\fB\-m #\fP
Use data only from material # (3 is for Si, 1 is for Oxide, 7 for all)
.TP
\fB\-p pisc_file\fP
Data is from PISCES-IIB.  Use pisc_file for solution data.
.TP
\fB\-q\fP
Quiet mode. Do not interactively ask questions.
.TP
\fB\-t\fP
PISCES-IIB solution file contains deep level traps.
.TP
\fB\-v #\fP
Plot # as the solution variable.
.SH EXAMPLE
1 zotz> ig2image pn.msh \- generates NCSA Image data for pn.msh
.SH FILES
\&.piscestos4
holds the translated PISCES-IIB data file in SUPREM-IV format

for movies using SUPREM-IV, the structure files must be arranged in the
format basennn where nnn is a 3 digit number starting at 000 and 
incrementing sequentially.  this same format is used in naming the
output frames.  PISCES-IIB solution files must also be numbered sequentially.
.SH BUGS
no backup mode to change a previous entry.  you must rerun the program.

it can be slow for large frame sizes.  also try to specify even sizes.

please report any other bugs to huang@pudleys.stanford.edu
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Goodwin Chin
Robert Huang
