.TH DIGIT 1L "18 September 1985"
.SH NAME
digit \- digitize input from tablet
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B digit
[option switches]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Digit
will digitize points from the tablet
.RI ( "usually there will be a graph on the tablet" ). 
The coordinates of each point are put into an output file with the
.I x
coordinate in the first column and the
.I y
coordinate in the second column.

If the user is in
.I interactive
mode, the program will give the user a command prompt,
.BR digit> "."
Otherwise, the program will first do a
.B setup
procedure which will ask the user to enter three different points on the
axes.  For the program to work properly one point must be on the
.I origin,
one on the end of the
.I x
axis, and one on the end
.I y
axis.  The program will only accept axes which
are orthogonal.  If the axes are not within a few
degrees from being orthogonal, the user
will be asked to reenter
the points.  Then the program will
make sure that the scales for
.I x
and
.I y
have been entered.  The user will be prompted for
any information it needs.  The program will
initialize by rescaling the plotting device to match the graph. Then it will
take points entered from the plotting device and put the coordinates into
an output file, and it will exit the program.
.SH OPTION-SWITCHES
.TP 10n
.BR \- "command [value]"
.B Any
of the commands in digit can be used as
option switches.  If the command
does not require that a
.I value
be given then the program will not expect to find one.
.TP
.BR \-i
The program will go into an interactive mode
after all of the switches have been evaluated.
The default is to digitize and then exit the program. 
This switch is useful if you are going to digitize more than one graph.
.SH
.B NOTE:
switches are processed in the order in which they are entered
.SH COMMANDS
.TP 10n
.BR digitize
This command will cause the program to
automatically lead the user through the program
and will ask the user for any information that it needs.
.B No other commands should be necessary.
However, if the user enters values for
some or all of the variables then the program will
run faster because it won't need to ask the user for
those values.
.TP
.BR device " plot-device (or) " d " plot-device"
The plotting device will be set to be
.I plot-device.
.TP
.BR min.x "  value"
This sets the
.I minimum
value of
.I x
to be equal to
.I value.
.TP
.BR max.x " value"
This sets the
.I maximum
value of
.I x
to be equal to
.I value.
.TP
.BR min.y "  value"
This sets the
.I minimum
value of
.I y
to be equal to
.I value.
.TP
.BR max.y " value"
This sets the
.I maximum
value of
.I y
to be equal to
.I value.
.TP
.BR log.x
This tells the program that all
.I x
values are scaled logarithmically on the graph.
.TP
.BR log.y
This tells the program that all
.I y
values are scaled logarithmically on the graph.
.TP
.BR lin.x
This tells the program that
.I x
values are scaled linearly on the graph.
This is the default.
.TP
.BR lin.y
This tells the program that
.I y
values are scaled linearly on the graph.
This is the default.
.TP
.BR write " filename (or) " o " filename"
The file
.I filename
will be rewritten or is created so that the
data points can be put into it.
.TP
.BR append " filename"
The file
.I filename
will be opened in append mode.
.TP
.BR file " [filename]"
The program will digitize points
entered from the tablet.  The output
will be written into
.I filename.
.TP
.BR setup
This calls a procedure which will initalize
the program so that it will be able to
properly convert the input from the tablet.
.TP
.B show
The value for each variable will
be printed onto the terminal screen.
.TP
.BR verbose " (or) " v
Toggles between verbose and no verbose
modes.  In verbose mode the program will print
the coordinates of each point that was entered from
the tablet and will tell the user the total number of
points that were entered.
.TP
.BR graph " (or) " g
Toggles between graph and no graph modes.
In graph mode the program will automatically
plot the input onto to screen after all of the
data points have been entered.
.TP
.B quit
Terminates the program.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following line of commands will open 
.I test.out,
set the maximum and minimum values of both
x and y, set the plotting device to be
.I tekct,
and will cause the program to automatically
.B digitize
after all of the switches on the command line have been evaluated.
.sp 1
.RS
% digit \-o test.out \-min.x 0 \-max.x 0.44 \-min.y 1e17
 \-max.y 1e19 \-log.y \-d tekct
.sp 1
.RE
or to do the same thing without using switches the user would type
.sp 1
.RS
% digit \-i
.br
digit> write test.out
.br
digit> min.x 0
.br
digit> max.x .44
.br
digit> min.y 1e17
.br
digit> max.y 1e19
.br
digit> log.y
.br
digit> d tekct
.br
digit> digitize
.br
digit> quit
.RE
.sp 1
or the user could simply type
.sp 1
.RS
% digit
.sp 1
.RE
and the user will be prompted for all of the other necessary information.
.SH BUGS
The program cannot digitize graphs that are in polar coordinates.
.SH AUTHOR
Todd Atkins
