.\" @(#)w.1 1.1 86/07/10 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.TH BIPMESH 1 "28 February 1989"
.SH NAME
bipmesh \- Pisces deck generator for simple MOS devices - Version 8908
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBbipmesh\fP [ \fB\-abs -f [defaultfile] -m[modifyfile] -o [outputfile] \fP ] [ outputfile ]
.IX  "w command"  ""  "\fLw\fP \(em what are users doing"
.IX  "what are users doing"  ""  "what are users doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.IX  users  "what are they doing"  users  "what are they doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.IX  login  "what are users doing"  login  "what are users doing \(em \fLw\fP"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fIBIPMESH\fP is an interactive program that generates a PISCES2-B input
deck for bipolar structures.
Questions are asked of the user such as doping concentrations and
lateral dimension.
Upon completion, a pisces deck is generated in file outputfile.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fP
Use analytic functions for doping profiles [default].
.TP
\fB\-b\fP
Batch mode.  take default data and generate a deck.
.TP
\fB\-c\fP
indicates that both Suprem3 and analytic doping profiles will be used
.TP
\fB\-f [defaultfile]\fP
read default information from file defaultfile.  if no filename is given
then the default is .defaultmesh.
.TP
\fB\-m [modifyfile]\fP
indicates that the default values to change (along with their new values)
are present in file modifyfile.
.TP
\fB\-o [filename]\fP
write output to filename.  if no filename is given then the default is
mosmesh.out.  also if a filename is given as the last argument to 
mosmesh, then the -o flag is ignored.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP
indicates that Suprem3 doping profiles will be used
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.nf
1 zotz> mosmesh -f playmesh -o outfile \- generates Pisces deck from information
                                  in playmesh and writes the deck to outfile.
                                  
2 zotz> mosmesh -s bip.in \- use Suprem3 doping files and creates a pisces deck bip.in.

3 zotz> mosmesh -m changes -b -o outfile \- operates in batch mode, using the defaults
                                   in .defaultmesh.  In addition any changes to the
                                   default values are specified in file changes.
.SH FILES
.fi
\&.defaultmesh
holds responses from previous mosmesh run

\&.tempfile
holds data from current session

.SH BUGS
.nf
does not check input for unreasonable data
no backup mode to change a previous entry.  you must rerun the program.
please report any other bugs to chin@rats.stanford.edu
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Mark Law
Goodwin Chin
